---
layout: project
title: MAE 4300 Final Write Up
description: Final Report in MAE 4300
---
# Ethical Analysis of the Boeing 737 MAX Crashes  

Throughout the semester in MAE 4300 Engineers and Society at Cornell University, we went through the process of ethical analysis for a series of Boeing 737 MAX plane crashes and discussed how this relates to our careers as mechanical engineers. After identifying stakeholders and collecting relevant facts we selected the five most important issues. From here, we practiced making reasonable assumptions about the missing facts, made suggestions to resolve the selected issues based on the ASME cannons, and finally identified constraints to these suggested ethical decisions.
Two Boeing 737 MAX aircrafts crashed shortly after landing due to the repeated activation of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS). This was a new flight control software system intended to automatically prevent an aerodynamic stall by forcing the aircraft’s nose downward but it was unfortunately triggered at the wrong time and resulted in the deaths of the passengers and crew and ultimately the grounding of the 737 MAX. While the crashes were caused directly by the failure of the MCAS system, there were many underlying problems with Boeing and the regulations governing aviation safety. Namely, competitive market pressure from the Airbus A320neo release and aggressive deadlines from Boeing management which prioritized cost and timelines over safety and quality engineering decisions. At the same time, the FAA allowed companies to self certify, which let these subpar design decisions reach the market. These factors made for an interesting conversation about professional responsibility, stakeholder analysis, and ethical considerations.
The first dilemma I selected was if Boeing should have recommended to the FAA that pilots complete required training on the new MCAS system. Based on ASME Canon 1 which states that “engineers shall hold paramount the safety, health and welfare of the public in the performance of their professional duties” I suggested that Boeing should’ve required pilot training on this system. This training could’ve given pilots the knowledge they needed to override the MCAS failures and prevent the crashes. However, one constraint was the financial pressure after Boeing promised airlines that there would be no training. 
Not only did Boeing not require pilots to train with the MCAS system, the addition of the MCAS system to the 737 MAX was not disclosed to pilots and this is what I selected as my second issue. My suggestion was that this addition should’ve been made known based on ASME Canon 7 which states that “Engineers shall issue public statements only in an objective and truthful manner and shall avoid any conduct which brings discredit upon the profession.” Knowledge of this system could’ve given pilots the knowledge they needed to understand the failure and prevent the crashes.The identified constraint was the regulatory ambiguity surrounding software additions and organizational pressure to not require training for pilots.
During Boeing test flights, problems were identified with the MCAS system that were not fixed before the aircraft was released to market. Agreeing with ASME Canon 1, I recommended that these problems should’ve been remedied. Fixing the glitches with MCAS would’ve allowed Boeing to provide the public with a safer aircraft than they did. The intense timeline restrictions that engineers faced to compete with the successful release of the Airbus A320neo were a major constraint that prevented them from doing so. 
After the first crash of Lion Air flight 610, the Boeing 737 MAX was not grounded and wouldn’t be grounded until the second crash of Ethiopian Airlines flight 302 a year later. Considering again ASME Canon 1, I suggested that the aircraft should’ve been grounded after the first crash to protect the safety of the public. The Lion Air flight killed all 189 people onboard. Grounding the 737 MAX until the MCAS issues were fixed could have prevented the loss of all 157 people aboard the Ethiopian Airlines flight.. Boeing's financial success relied on the popular 737 and there was pressure to continue fulfilling orders for airlines. Additionally, the creation of information silos among engineers left employees with the idea that another team was responsible for the fixes.
Finally, I considered if it was right for the FAA to allow Boeing to conduct their own safety investigations. Based on ASME Canon 1 and Canon 2 which states “Engineers shall perform services only in the areas of their competence; they shall build their professional reputation on the merit of their services and shall not compete unfairly with others,” I  recommended that the FAA should’ve remained in control of the safety certification process. The FAA’s oversight allowed these problematic decisions to reach the public in a tragic way. However, regulatory ambiguity and global certification standards made this process convoluted.
The Boeing 737 MAX case showed us how our roles as mechanical engineers impact public safety in important ways. It helped us develop the tool of ethical analysis and gain familiarity with the ASME Code of Ethics which will both help us to uphold strong ethics in our future careers.
